

described in: **Systems-level interactions between insulin-EGF networks
amplify mitogenic signaling.**  
Borisov N, Aksamitiene E, Kiyatkin A, Legewie S, Berkhout J, Maiwald T,
Kaimachnikov NP, Timmer J, Hoek JB, Kholodenko BN.;_Mol Syst Biol._
2009;5:256. Epub 2009 Apr 7.
PMID:[19357636](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19357636);
doi:[10.1038/msb.2009.19](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/msb.2009.19)  
**Abstract:**   
Crosstalk mechanisms have not been studied as thoroughly as individual
signaling pathways. We exploit experimental and computational approaches to
reveal how a concordant interplay between the insulin and epidermal growth
factor (EGF) signaling networks can potentiate mitogenic signaling. In HEK293
cells, insulin is a poor activator of the Ras/ERK (extracellular signal-
regulated kinase) cascade, yet it enhances ERK activation by low EGF doses. We
find that major crosstalk mechanisms that amplify ERK signaling are localized
upstream of Ras and at the Ras/Raf level. Computational modeling unveils how
critical network nodes, the adaptor proteins GAB1 and insulin receptor
substrate (IRS), Src kinase, and phosphatase SHP2, convert insulin-induced
increase in the phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP(3)) concentration
into enhanced Ras/ERK activity. The model predicts and experiments confirm
that insulin-induced amplification of mitogenic signaling is abolished by
disrupting PIP(3)-mediated positive feedback via GAB1 and IRS. We demonstrate
that GAB1 behaves as a non-linear amplifier of mitogenic responses and insulin
endows EGF signaling with robustness to GAB1 suppression. Our results show the
feasibility of using computational models to identify key target combinations
and predict complex cellular responses to a mixture of external cues.

An extracellular compartment with 34 times the volume of the cell was added
and the association rate as well as the dissociation constants for Insulin and
EGF binding were altered (kon'=34*kon, KD'=KD/34). This was done to allow
using the concentrations for those species given in the article and retaining
the same dynamics and Ligand depletion as in the matlab file the SBML file was
exported from.

SBML model exported from PottersWheel on 2008-10-14 16:26:44.

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
For more information see the [terms of
use](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/legal.html).  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)

